The neural network varies form statistical approach. It is more sensitive and prone to overfitting and ignoring the minority classes especially for binary classification model. Since the network is learning the result, the data should be balanced to produce an accurate representation of the model based on fairly proportional input. The readmission binary categorical classification variable of the model is imbalanced. The number of positive readmitted patients is much larger than those whom did not readmitted. The ratio of positive reemission is over 10 times the size of the not readmitted which indicates that more than 90% of the classification variable are of the same class. The ANN sequential model with sigmoid will produce an overfitting result with high accuracy of 91 % and very low precision and recall. In addition the model will not exhibit any learning process. The lost and accuracy will remain constant throughout the learning process. To overcome the problem a different approaches where conducted. The class-weigh and SMOTE methods where selected to predict the readmission classifications. The weight method treat every instance of minority class as multiple instance of majority class based on the ratio between the two classes. It means the loss function will assign a higher value to these minority instances using the ratio between majority and minority classes. Thus, the loss becomes a weighted average, where the weight of each sample is specified by its corresponding class. The model exhibits moderate predicted accuracy value of 82%. The precision of the model is 91% and the recall is 88%.


The Sampling method utilizes the SMOTE algorithm which an oversampling method based on synthetic minority oversampling technique uses k-nearest neighbors to create synthetic examples of the minority class. It injects the SMOTE method at each iteration. The advantage of this approach is that while standard boosting gives equal weights to all misclassified data, SMOTE gives more examples of the minority class at each boosting step. The model produces and highly correlated result with 92 % accuracy. This result is confirmed by the high precision of 87% and 99% of recall.
